Add support for new pattern kinds (#873)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/patterns.md

> ## 11.1 General

Reviewer: Is a value matched/tested against a pattern, or is a pattern matched/tested against a value?

My unscientific guess is value against pattern is the more common usage (including dare I mention in MS web pages), the Standard often goes with pattern against value – though not consistently, the edit below to line 5 changes from “pattern is tested against” to “data … matched against [patterns]”, while line 7 goes with “pattern is tested against”.

Which should the Standard use, or can it be happily inconsistent (variety is after all the spice of life :-))

I will leave you to muse, during review I have so far intentionally not suggested any changes from one to the other, or for consistency – but apologies if my resolve fails! ;-)

Addendum: The term “*pattern* input value” (emphasis added) is related to this – it is currently defined and used 12 times after in the Standard. Other languages tend to use terms which don’t imply that the value is going “into” the pattern (in the sense an argument value goes into a method). For example F#, a sibling language to C#, has a match expression, similar to C#’s switch expression, and talks about the input to the match, not the input to the pattern.

Reviewer 2: Leaving for folks to think about - please add comments, everyone.

Reviewer 2: In fact, let's deem this non-blocking, but @RexJaeschke will create a new issue to capture it.

Author: See Issue https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/1424.

> A ***pattern*** is a syntactic form that can be used with the `is` operator ([§12.12.12](expressions.md#121212-the-is-operator)), in a *switch_statement* ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)), and in a *switch_expression* (§switch-expression-new-clause) to express the shape of data against which incoming data is to be compared. Patterns may be recursive, so that parts of the data may be matched against ***sub-patterns***.  

Reviewer: Fix xref:

```suggestion
A ***pattern*** is a syntactic form that can be used with the `is` operator ([§12.13.12](expressions.md#121312-the-is-operator)), in a *switch_statement* ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)), and in a *switch_expression* (§switch-expression-new-clause) to express the shape of data against which incoming data is to be compared. Patterns may be recursive, so that parts of the data may be matched against ***sub-patterns***.  
```

> A ***pattern*** is a syntactic form that can be used with the `is` operator ([§12.12.12](expressions.md#121212-the-is-operator)), in a *switch_statement* ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)), and in a *switch_expression* (§switch-expression-new-clause) to express the shape of data against which incoming data is to be compared. Patterns may be recursive, so that parts of the data may be matched against ***sub-patterns***.  

Reviewer: “is a syntactic form” is rather redundant
“express the shape” -> “describe the shape”?
“recursive” -> “nested”?

```suggestion
A ***pattern*** may be used with the `is` operator ([§12.12.12](expressions.md#121212-the-is-operator)), in a *switch_statement* ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)), and in a *switch_expression* (§switch-expression-new-clause) to describe the shape of data against which incoming data is to be compared. Patterns may be nested, with parts of the data being matched against ***sub-patterns***.  
```

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> A pattern is tested against a value in a number of contexts:  

Reviewer: Fix MDlint error – space before list.

```suggestion
A pattern is tested against a value in a number of contexts:

```

> A pattern is tested against a value in a number of contexts:  
> - In a switch statement, the *pattern* of a case label is tested against the *expression* of the switch statement.  

Reviewer: Fix mdlint error

```suggestion
A pattern is tested against a value in a number of contexts:

- In a switch statement, the *pattern* of a case label is tested against the *expression* of the switch statement.  
```

> - In a switch statement, the *pattern* of a case label is tested against the *expression* of the switch statement.  
> - In an *is-pattern* operator, the *pattern* on the right-hand-side is tested against the expression on the left.  
> - In a switch expression, the *pattern* of a *switch_expression_arm* is tested against the expression on the switch-expression's left-hand-side.  
> - In nested contexts, the *sub-pattern* is tested against values retrieved from properties, fields, or indexed from other input values, depending on the pattern form.  

Reviewer: The first bullet names its construct “switch statement”, the second uses the rule name, “*is-pattern*”, while the third does both, “switch expression” & ”*switch-expression*”. Maybe  use one style consistently? Given the second bullet I might go with the rule names:

```suggestion
- In a *switch_statement*, the *pattern* of a *switch_label* is tested against the *selector_expression* of the *switch_statement*.  
- With an *is-pattern* operator, the *pattern* on the right-hand-side is tested against the expression on the left.  
- In a *switch_expression*, the *pattern* of a *switch_expression_arm* is tested against the expression on the *switch_expression*’s left-hand-side.  
- In nested contexts, the *sub-pattern* is tested against values retrieved from properties, fields, or indexed from other input values, depending on the pattern form.  
```

Yes, I left two occurrences of “expression” as in both cases *expression* is technically wrong but the actual rule name would I think be unhelpful.

Feel free to wordsmith better options!

Reviewer 2: Is the change from "In" to "With" in the second bullet deliberate to avoid the slight stutter of "In an is"? Or am I missing something more subtle?

Reviewer: @jskeet – Me subtle? ;-) Bullets 1, 3, 4 relate to being in a statement/expression/nested context – all items with multiple parts; for bullet 2 it didn't read right to me to be “in” an operator (sounds like you’re in the code for an operator, similar to being in a method), so I used with an operator.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> The value against which a pattern is tested is called the ***pattern input value*** for the pattern.  

Reviewer 3: Wordsmithing idea
```suggestion
The value against which a pattern is tested is called the ***pattern input value***.
```

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me.

## 11.1 General

> A ***pattern*** is a syntactic form that can be used with the `is` operator ([§12.12.12](expressions.md#121212-the-is-operator)), in a *switch_statement* ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)), and in a *switch_expression* (§switch-expression-new-clause) to express the shape of data against which incoming data is to be compared. Patterns may be recursive, so that parts of the data may be matched against ***sub-patterns***.  A pattern is tested against the *expression* of a switch statement, or against a *relational_expression* that is on the left-hand side of an `is` operator, each of which is referred to as a ***pattern input value***.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A ***pattern*** is a syntactic form that can be used with the `is` operator ([§12.12.12](expressions.md#121212-the-is-operator)), in a *switch_statement* ([§13.8.3](statements.md#1383-the-switch-statement)), and in a *switch_expression* (§switch-expression-new-clause) to express the shape of data against which incoming data is to be compared. Patterns may be recursive, so that parts of the data may be matched against ***sub-patterns***.

A pattern is tested against a value in a number of contexts:
- In a switch statement, the *pattern* of a case label is tested against the *expression* of the switch statement.
- In an *is-pattern* operator, the *pattern* on the right-hand-side is tested against the expression on the left.
- In a switch expression, the *pattern* of a *switch_expression_arm* is tested against the expression on the switch-expression's left-hand-side.
- In nested contexts, the *sub-pattern* is tested against values retrieved from properties, fields, or indexed from other input values, depending on the pattern form.

The value against which a pattern is tested is called the ***pattern input value*** for the pattern.
```

Reviewer: 👍’ed the above but a minor grammar question: should the first  comma of each bullet be a semi-colon?

Reviewer 3: > In nested contexts, the *sub-pattern* is tested against values retrieved from properties, fields, or indexed from other input values, depending on the pattern form.

When we get to C# 9 with parenthesized patterns and logical patterns, we might want to remember to come back if we don't generalize this statement now, since `and` takes two subpatterns that do not retrieve new values to test against.

Reviewer: Previous comment from @jnm2 spun off as #1648

    : declaration_pattern
    | constant_pattern
    | var_pattern
    | positional_pattern
    | property_pattern
    | discard_pattern
    ;
```

Some *pattern*s can result in the declaration of a local variable.

Each pattern form defines the set of types for input values that the pattern may be applied to. A pattern `P` is *applicable to* a type `T` if `T` is among the types whose values the pattern may match. It is a compile-time error if a pattern `P` appears in a program to match a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) of type `T` if `P` is not applicable to `T`.

Each pattern form defines the set of values for which the pattern *matches* the value at runtime.

> With regard to the order of evaluation of operations and side effects during pattern-matching, an implementation is permitted to reorder calls to `Deconstruct`, property accesses, and invocations of methods in `System.ITuple`, and it may assume that returned values are the same from multiple calls. The implementation should not invoke functions that cannot affect the result.

Reviewer: Line 192 below says the order is not specified, so an implementation cannot “reorder” – it just picks an order. What the Standard needs to say is that the order of operations, and any resulting side effects, is implementation defined/specified or unspecified (whichever term from the collection is appropriate here).

The last sentence (“The implementation should not invoke functions that cannot affect the result”) is either redundant or should be a Note.

Reviewer 4: In code such as
```csharp
var x = e switch {
    A(1, 2) => 1
    _       => 1
}
```
Is the compiler allowed to get the properties and test the values of `A`, or is that not allowed because it does not affect the 'result'?

How normative is a 'should' and what is a 'result'?

### 11.2.2 Declaration pattern

A *declaration_pattern* is used to test that a value has a given type and, if the test succeeds, to optionally provide the value in a variable of that type.

```ANTLR
declaration_pattern
    : type simple_designation
    ;
simple_designation
    : discard_designation
    | single_variable_designation
    ;
discard_designation
    : '_'
    ;
single_variable_designation
    : identifier
    ;
```

> > *Note*: The ordering of the grammar rules in *simple_designation* is important. By putting *discard_designation” first, the source token `_` is recognized as a discard rather than as a named identifier. *end note*

Reviewer: We have not previously specified that the alternatives in a C# grammar rule are ordered, even though we use ANTLR as a notation. Rather we have specified a disambiguation rule, and sometimes a note saying ANTLR semantics give an implementer a free implementation of the rule; e.g. in §12.19.1 we have:

> When recognising an *anonymous_function_body* if both the *null_conditional_invocation_expression* and *expression* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.
>
> *Note*: The overlapping of, and priority between, alternatives here is solely for descriptive convenience; the grammar rules could be elaborated to remove the overlap. ANTLR, and other grammar systems, adopt the same convenience and so *anonymous_function_body* has the specified semantics automatically. *end note*

This note here should either be re-written in our current style or we should re-consider how we describe overlapping/ambiguous alternatives and re-write them all to consistent to whatever we decide.

Reviewer 4: I think the note should say that a *single_variable_designation* cannot be the identifier `_`, which is taken as a *discard_designation*.

Reviewer: OK, my suggestion following the pattern of §12.19.1:

```suggestion
When recognising an *simple_designation* if both the *discard_designation* and *single_variable_designation* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.

> *Note*: Using ANTLR *simple_designation* will have the required semantics automatically, as ANTLR adopts the convenience of selecting the first alternative when multiple alternatives are applicable. *end note*
```

Possible wording for @gafter’s follows, 👍 which you prefer…

Reviewer: And possible wording for @gafter’s suggestion:

```suggestion
The *identifier* of a *single_variable_designation* may not be “_”.

> Note: This restriction exists to avoid an ambiguity in *simple_designation*.
```

(@gafter – feel free to reword!)

👍 your pick…

Each pattern form defines the set of values for which the pattern *matches* the value at runtime.

With regard to the order of evaluation of operations and side effects during pattern-matching, an implementation is permitted to reorder calls to `Deconstruct`, property accesses, and invocations of methods in `System.ITuple`, and it may assume that returned values are the same from multiple calls. The implementation should not invoke functions that cannot affect the result.

### 11.2.2 Declaration pattern

A *declaration_pattern* is used to test that a value has a given type and, if the test succeeds, to optionally provide the value in a variable of that type.

```ANTLR
declaration_pattern
    : type simple_designation
    ;
simple_designation
    : discard_designation
    | single_variable_designation
    ;
discard_designation
    : '_'
    ;
single_variable_designation
    : identifier
    ;
```

> *Note*: The ordering of the grammar rules in *simple_designation* is important. By putting *discard_designation” first, the source token `_` is recognized as a discard rather than as a named identifier. *end note*

> The runtime type of the value is tested against the *type* in the pattern using the same rules specified in the is-type operator ([§12.12.12.1](expressions.md#1212121-the-is-type-operator)). If the test succeeds, the pattern *matches* that value. It is a compile-time error if the *type* is a nullable value type ([§8.3.12](types.md#8312-nullable-value-types)). This pattern form never matches a `null` value.

Reviewer 4: The constraint

>  It is a compile-time error if the *type* is a nullable value type

Appears both here and a couple of paragraphs below.

> *Note*: The is-type expression `e is T` and the declaration pattern `e is T _` are equivalent when `T` isn’t a nullable type. *end note*

> Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if the *simple_designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.1](variables.md#9291-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with the name `_` may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if *simple_designation* is *single_variable_designation*, a local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of the given type named by the given identifier is introduced. That local variable is assigned the value of the pattern input value when the pattern *matches* the value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if the *simple_designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.1](variables.md#9291-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with the name `_` may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if the *simple_designation* is *single_variable_designation*, a local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of the given type named by the given identifier is introduced. That local variable is assigned the value of the pattern input value when the pattern *matches* the value.
```

(Just for consistency between the two checks.)

Each pattern form defines the set of values for which the pattern *matches* the value at runtime.

The order of evaluation of operations and side effects during pattern-matching (calls to `Deconstruct`, property accesses, and invocations of methods in `System.ITuple`) is not specified.

### 11.2.2 Declaration pattern

> A *declaration_pattern* is used to test that a value has a given type and, if the test succeeds, to optionally provide the value in a variable of that type.

Reviewer: I think there probably needs to be some syncing up between here and §9.2.9 *Local variables*, $9.4 *Definite assignment*, including the lifetime & scope of the variable – hardly anything is stated about these here:

- Line 90 below states the variable is assigned on a match
- **Informatively** line 121 states for the example that after the `if` the variable is in scope but not definitely assigned, there is no `else` in the example so the definite assignment status there is not covered.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

```ANTLR
declaration_pattern
    : type simple_designation
    ;
simple_designation
    : discard_designation
    | single_variable_designation
    ;
discard_designation
    : '_'
    ;
single_variable_designation
    : identifier
    ;
```

> 

Reviewer: ### Dealing with “var x” – Part 1

There is an ambiguity in patterns, the input “var x” could be recognised as a *declaration_pattern* or as a *var_pattern*. As is this PR only deals with the latter, on line 191 below, and says nothing about the former.

I think the intended semantics are:

- In *declaration_pattern* the *type* cannot be the *identifier* `var`; i.e. if it starts with `var` then *var_pattern* is considered.
- A *var_pattern* is invalid (not considered as a valid parse) if a type called `var` is in scope.

This is tackled with two suggestions:

1. This one, covering *declaration_pattern*
2. Reword the original statement on line 191 ([Part 2](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/873/files#r2370216978))

```suggestion

The *type* of a *declaration_pattern* cannot be the *identifier* `var`.

> *Note:* In such a case the input may be recognisable as a *var_pattern* (§11.2.4).

```

Reviewer 4: If a type `var` is in scope, neither the var pattern nor the declaration pattern with that type is valid.

Reviewer: @gafter – Agree, that is why line 86 in the above change says “may be”. See [Part 2](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/873/files#r2370216978) where a wording & position change proposal for the definition of this restriction is made.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> A *simple_designation* with the token `_` shall be considered a *discard_designation* rather than a *single_variable_designation*.

Reviewer: Following the comment on [line 4419 of expressions.md](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/873/files#r2361681490):

```suggestion
When recognising a *simple_designation* if both the *discard_designation* and *single_variable_designation* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.
```

Reviewer 4: Is the suggestion really more clear?

Reviewer: @gafter – It is just the wording pattern that we’ve been using elsewhere, so it is a consistency suggestion which I guess helps clarity? (I think the link I included is no longer valid)

> The runtime type of the value is tested against the *type* in the pattern using the same rules specified in the is-type operator ([§12.13.12.1](expressions.md#1213121-the-is-type-operator)). If the test succeeds, the pattern *matches* that value. It is a compile-time error if the *type* is a nullable value type ([§8.3.12](types.md#8312-nullable-value-types)) or a nullable reference type ([§8.9.3](types.md#893-nullable-reference-types)). This pattern form never matches a `null` value.

Reviewer: A reordering, so the errors come after the reason, and minor reword:

```suggestion
The runtime type of the value is tested against the *type* in the pattern using the same rules specified in the is-type operator ([§12.13.12.1](expressions.md#1213121-the-is-type-operator)). If the test succeeds, the pattern *matches* that value. This pattern form does not match a `null` value. It is a compile-time error if the *type* is a nullable value type ([§8.3.12](types.md#8312-nullable-value-types)) or a nullable reference type ([§8.9.3](types.md#893-nullable-reference-types)).
```

> The runtime type of the value is tested against the *type* in the pattern using the same rules specified in the is-type operator ([§12.13.12.1](expressions.md#1213121-the-is-type-operator)). If the test succeeds, the pattern *matches* that value. It is a compile-time error if the *type* is a nullable value type ([§8.3.12](types.md#8312-nullable-value-types)) or a nullable reference type ([§8.9.3](types.md#893-nullable-reference-types)). This pattern form never matches a `null` value.

Reviewer: This states the match follows the rules of `is` (§12.13.12.1), then goes on to “If the test succeeds”.

That test works for nullable value types, but here a following sentence makes that a compile time error.

That test returns false for a null value, this is re-iterated in the last sentence here.

That test never considers user-defined conversions, that is not re-iterated here.

The description of that test carries a *Note* (informative) that as the test is performed at runtime there are no open types, line 92 below says open types are allowed…

This section and §12.13.12.1 need to be aligned, the tests for the two are currently documented to be different but also stated to be the same.

Reviewer 3: An example of `is Xyz` and `is Xyz d` behaving differently is that `is dynamic` compiles, and `is dynamic d` does not.

Reviewer 4: It is the testing of the value against the type that uses the same rules. There are additional constraints for a declaration pattern.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> *Note*: The is-type expression `e is T` and the declaration pattern `e is T _` are equivalent when `T` isn’t a nullable type. *end note*

> Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if the *simple_designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.1](variables.md#9291-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with the name `_` may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if the *simple_designation* is *single_variable_designation*, a local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of the given type named by the given identifier is introduced. That local variable is assigned the value of the pattern input value when the pattern *matches* the value.  

Reviewer: 1. Fix xref
2. Drop the parenthetical note it is a re-statement of 2 paras back
3. Change tense

```suggestion
Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if the *simple_designation* is a *discard_designation*, denoting a discard ([§9.2.9.2](variables.md#9292-discards)), the value of *e* is not bound to anything. Otherwise, if the *simple_designation* is a *single_variable_designation*, a local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of the given type named by the given identifier is introduced. That local variable is assigned the value of the pattern input value when the pattern *matches* the value.
```

The ”not bound to *anything*” feels wrong as well but my wordsmithing is failing me…

Reviewer 2: (I've updated Nigel's suggestion to remove trailing spaces.)

Reviewer 5: This suggestion will fix the Word converter (the discard link):

```suggestion
Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if the *simple_designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.2](variables.md#9292-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with the name `_` may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if the *simple_designation* is *single_variable_designation*, a local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of the given type named by the given identifier is introduced. That local variable is assigned the value of the pattern input value when the pattern *matches* the value.  
```

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> Certain combinations of static type of the pattern input value and the given type are considered incompatible and result in a compile-time error. A value of static type `E` is said to be ***pattern compatible*** with the type `T` if there exists an identity conversion, an implicit or explicit reference conversion, a boxing conversion, or an unboxing conversion from `E` to `T`, or if either `E` or `T` is an open type ([§8.4.3](types.md#843-open-and-closed-types)). A declaration pattern naming a type `T` is *applicable to* every type `E` for which `E` is pattern compatible with `T`.

Reviewer: There is no “considered incompatible” but ”are incompatible”.

Further “Certain combinations” seems wrong to me, I think the order is: define pattern compatible, define applicable to (though why are two terms required?), state that if the type of the declaration pattern is not compatible with/applicable to the static type of the input value then a compile time error shall be thrown.

Apologies, no wordsmithing suggestion right now, maybe I’ll come up with one when I resume reviewing later…

Reviewer: Added to #1432

>
> *end example*

> 

Reviewer 5: this drove me nuts at first. When we have repeated example / note blocks, we need to disable a markdown lint warning:

```suggestion
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
```

> if (x is int v) { /* code using v */ }
> ```
>

> > The condition of the `if` statement is `true` at runtime and the variable `v` holds the value `3` of type `int` inside the block. After the block the variable `v` is in scope, but not definitely assigned. *end example*

Reviewer: See comment on line 66

Reviewer 4: I don't see a comment on line 66. Please repeat the comment.

Reviewer: @gafter – https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/873#discussion_r2366395973

Reviewer: Added to #1432 as part of #1662

    ;
designations
    : designation
    | designations ',' designation
    ;
```

Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if *designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.1](variables.md#9291-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with that name may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if *designation* is *single_variable_designation*, at runtime the value of *e* is bound to a newly introduced local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of that name whose type is the static type of *e*, and the pattern input value is assigned to that local variable.

It is an error if the name `var` would bind to a type where a *var_pattern* is used.

If *designation* is a *tuple_designation*, the pattern is equivalent to a *positional_pattern* (§positional-pattern-new-clause) of the form `(var` *designation*, ... `)` where the *designation*s are those found within the *tuple_designation*.  For example, the pattern `var (x, (y, z))` is equivalent to `(var x, (var y, var z))`.

### §positional-pattern-new-clause Positional pattern

> A *positional_pattern* checks that the input value is not `null`, invokes an appropriate `Deconstruct` method ([§12.7](expressions.md#127-deconstruction)), and performs further pattern matching on the resulting values.  It also supports a tuple-like pattern syntax (without the type being provided) when the type of the input value is the same as the type containing `Deconstruct`, or if the type of the input value is a tuple type, or if the type of the input value is `object` or `System.ITuple` and the runtime type of the expression implements `System.ITuple`.

Reviewer: This feels like it is repeating stuff which is (or should be, e.g. `System.ITuple` is not in §12.7 at present) in §12.7 Deconstruction and this here should be something like:

> A *positional_pattern* checks that the input value is not `null`, performs a deconstruction ([§12.7](expressions.md#127-deconstruction)), and performs further pattern matching on the resulting values.

Reviewer 2: Not sure that ITuple *should* be mentioned in 12.7, as I *think* it's only used in positional patterns, not more general deconstruction. It's possible we should centralise its use within patterns though.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to say what the compiler invokes on `ITuple`? (And we need it to be in the relevant annex.) Or just "in order for the pattern to match, the number of subpatterns in the positional pattern must be the same as the number of items in the ITuple, and (something about conversions)"?

Reviewer: (My summary & thoughts post meeting)

The cases this covers:

- if the input value is a tuple type: the number of subpatterns must statically match the tuple arity, subpatterns & tuple elements are matched pairwise, order not specified, match can fail without checking all subpatterns.
- if the input value has a `Deconstruct` method whose number out parameters match the number of subpatterns, and the types of each parameter is compatible with the corresponding subpatterns matched pairwise then the values from invoking `Deconstruct` are matched pairwise, order not specified, match can fail without checking all subpatterns.
- if the input value implements `ITuple` then the number of elements in the `ITuple` value is checked at runtime to be equal to the number of subpatterns. Then the elements of the `ITuple` value are matched pairwise… etc.

I’ve listed these cases in the probable order of priority, i.e. if the input value is a tuple the first case is picked even though tuples implement `ITuple` (if that is added to the Standard) and `Deconstruct` (if that is added to the Standard); next if the type of the input value implements a suitable `Deconstruct` then case 2 is chosen; finally, if applicable, case 3 with dynamic arity check is chosen, and a compile time error occurs if it is not applicable.

Is this ordering correct, note it does not match the current text?

Whatever the ordering it needs to be clearly specified.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

    ;
designation
    : simple_designation
    | tuple_designation
    ;
tuple_designation
    : '(' designations? ')'
    ;
designations
    : designation
    | designations ',' designation
    ;
```

> Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if *designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.1](variables.md#9291-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with that name may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if *designation* is *single_variable_designation*, at runtime the value of *e* is bound to a newly introduced local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of that name whose type is the static type of *e*, and the pattern input value is assigned to that local variable.

Reviewer 2: This time we've got "if *designation*" twice - we could make both of these match "if the *designation*" from line 82, or remove "the" from line 82.

It is an error if the name `var` would bind to a type where a *var_pattern* is used.

> If *designation* is a *tuple_designation*, the pattern is equivalent to a *positional_pattern* (§positional-pattern-new-clause) of the form `(var` *designation*, ... `)` where the *designation*s are those found within the *tuple_designation*.  For example, the pattern `var (x, (y, z))` is equivalent to `(var x, (var y, var z))`.

Reviewer 2: And again...

Reviewer 2: (I suspect we should just remove "the" from line 82 instead...)

### §positional-pattern-new-clause Positional pattern

A *positional_pattern* checks that the input value is not `null`, invokes an appropriate `Deconstruct` method ([§12.7](expressions.md#127-deconstruction)), and performs further pattern matching on the resulting values.  It also supports a tuple-like pattern syntax (without the type being provided) when the type of the input value is the same as the type containing `Deconstruct`, or if the type of the input value is a tuple type, or if the type of the input value is `object` or `System.ITuple` and the runtime type of the expression implements `System.ITuple`.

```ANTLR
positional_pattern
    : type? '(' subpatterns? ')' property_subpattern? simple_designation?
    ;
subpatterns
    : subpattern (',' subpatterns)?
    ;
subpattern
    : pattern
    | identifier ':' pattern

>     ;

Reviewer 3: (In future versions of C#, there will be other kinds of subpatterns besides property subpatterns and positional subpatterns, such as `<subpattern> and <subpattern>` in C# 9, or `is [<subpattern, <subpattern>]` later on. At that point, calling this definition `subpattern` will seem overly broad.)

Reviewer: @jnm2 – I think we need more than renaming a rule…

```

> If *type* is omitted, the type is assumed to be the static type of the input value.

Reviewer 4: This is not right, as an input value of type `object` can be matched against the pattern `(1, 2)`, but `object(1, 2)` is an error. I think this sentence can be removed.

Given a match of an input value to the pattern *type* `(` *subpatterns* `)`, a method is selected by searching in *type* for accessible declarations of `Deconstruct` and selecting one among them using the same rules as for the deconstruction declaration.
It is an error if a *positional_pattern* omits the type, has a single *subpattern* without an *identifier*, has no *property_subpattern* and has no *simple_designation*. This disambiguates between a *constant_pattern* that is parenthesized and a *positional_pattern*.
In order to extract the values to match against the patterns in the list,

> - If *type* is omitted and the input value's type is a tuple type, then the number of subpatterns shall to be the same as the cardinality of the tuple. Each tuple element is matched against the corresponding *subpattern*, and the match succeeds if all of these succeed. If any *subpattern* has an *identifier*, then that shall name a tuple element at the corresponding position in the tuple type.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- If *type* is omitted and the input value's type is a tuple type, then the number of subpatterns shall be the same as the cardinality of the tuple. Each tuple element is matched against the corresponding *subpattern*, and the match succeeds if all of these succeed. If any *subpattern* has an *identifier*, then that shall name a tuple element at the corresponding position in the tuple type.
```

Reviewer 2: Is "input value's type" here the compile-time type or the execution-time type? I assume it's compile-time, but it may be worth us clarifying.

- Otherwise, if a suitable `Deconstruct` exists as a member of *type*, it is a compile-time error if the type of the input value is not pattern-compatible with *type*. At runtime the input value is tested against *type*. If this fails, then the positional pattern match fails. If it succeeds, the input value is converted to this type and `Deconstruct` is invoked with fresh compiler-generated variables to receive the output parameters. Each value that was received is matched against the corresponding *subpattern*, and the match succeeds if all of these succeed. If any *subpattern* has an *identifier*, then that shall name a parameter at the corresponding position of `Deconstruct`.

> - Otherwise, if *type* is omitted, and the input value is of type `object`, `System.ITuple`, or some type that can be converted to `System.ITuple` by an implicit reference conversion, and no *identifier* appears among the subpatterns, then the match uses `System.ITuple`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, if *type* is omitted, and the input value is of type `object` or some type that can be converted to `System.ITuple` by an implicit reference conversion, and no *identifier* appears among the subpatterns, then the match uses `System.ITuple`.
```

(Basically this relies on the identity conversion from `ITuple` to `ITuple` which is, I believe, an implicit reference conversion.)

> - Otherwise, the pattern is a compile-time error.

Reviewer 3: Patterns (including property patterns and positional patterns) implicitly unwrap `System.Nullable<T>`, as part of their "checks that the input value is not `null`." Do we need to say something to this effect here?

Example:

```cs
class C
{
    void M(Point? p)
    {
        if (p is (var x, var y)) // True
        {
        }
    }
}

struct Point
{
    public int X, Y;
    public void Deconstruct(out int x, out int y) { x = X; y = Y; }
}
```

Reviewer: Nothing needs to be said, that's how checking whether a `Nullable<T>` is `null` works, which is defined elsewhere in the Standard.

> - Otherwise, the pattern is a compile-time error.

Reviewer 2: "results in" or something similar, rather than saying the pattern *is* an error? (Or perhaps "the pattern is invalid and a compile-time error shall be issued" or similar?

Reviewer: Previous comment added to #1432

>     public void Deconstruct(out int x, out int y) => (x, y) = (X, Y);
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Example*: The names of tuple elements and Deconstruct parameters can be used in a positional pattern, as follows:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"PositionalPattern2", ignoredWarnings:["CS8321"], inferOutput:true} -->
> ```csharp
> var numbers = new List<int> { 10, 20, 30 };
> if (SumAndCount(numbers) is (Sum: var sum, Count: var count))
> {
>     Console.WriteLine($"Sum of [{string.Join(" ", numbers)}] is {sum}");
> }
>
> static (double Sum, int Count) SumAndCount(IEnumerable<int> numbers)
> {
>     int sum = 0;
>     int count = 0;
>     foreach (int number in numbers)
>     {
>         sum += number;
>         count++;
>     }
>     return (sum, count);
> }
> ```
>
> The output produced is
>
> ```console
> Sum of [10 20 30] is 60
> ```
>
> *end example*

### §property-pattern-new-clause Property pattern

A *property_pattern* checks that the input value is not `null`, and recursively matches values extracted by the use of accessible properties or fields.

```ANTLR
property_pattern

>     : type? property_subpattern simple_designation?

Reviewer 2: I believe that `type` here can't be a nullable reference type or nullable value type. I suspect we need to state that.

    ;
property_subpattern
    : '{' '}'
    | '{' subpatterns ','? '}'
    ;
```

It is an error if any *subpattern* of a *property_pattern* does not contain an *identifier*.

> *Note*: A null-checking pattern falls out of a trivial property pattern. To check if the string `s` is non-null, one can write any of the following forms:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"PropertyPattern1", replaceEllipsis:true, customEllipsisReplacements: [";", ";", ";", ";"], ignoredWarnings:["CS0642"]} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> string s = "abc";
> if (s is object o) ...  // o is of type object
> if (s is string x1) ... // x1 is of type string
> if (s is {} x2) ...     // x2 is of type string

> > if (s is {}) ...

Reviewer 2: It may be worth noting the difference between:

```csharp
if (s is {} x2)
```

and

```csharp
if (s is var x3)
```

... the latter only matches on non-null values, whereas `var` would match on null (and the type of `x3` is `string?` instead of `string` in a nullable context). I only mention this as a reader might wonder why `{} x2` is useful when `var` exists.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> ```
>
> *end note*

> Given a match of an expression *e* to the pattern *type* `{` *property_pattern_list* `}`, it is a compile-time error if the expression *e* is not pattern-compatible with the type *T* designated by *type*. If the type is absent, the type is assumed to be the static type of *e*. If the *identifier* is present, it declares a pattern variable of type *type*. Each of the identifiers appearing on the left-hand-side of its *property_pattern_list* shall designate an accessible readable property or field of *T*. If the *simple_designation* of the *property_pattern* is present, it defines a pattern variable of type *T*.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given a match of an expression *e* to the pattern *type* `{` *property_pattern_list* `}`, it is a compile-time error if the expression *e* is not pattern-compatible with the type *T* designated by *type*. If the type is absent, the type is assumed to be the static type of *e*. Each of the identifiers appearing on the left-hand-side of its *property_pattern_list* shall designate an accessible readable property or field of *T*. If the *simple_designation* of the *property_pattern* is present, it declares a pattern variable of type *T*.
```

> At runtime, the expression is tested against *T*. If this fails then the property pattern match fails, and the result is `false`. If it succeeds, then each *property_subpattern* field or property is read, and its value matched against its corresponding pattern. The result of the whole match is `false` only if the result of any of these is `false`. The order in which subpatterns are matched is not specified, and a failed match may not match all subpatterns at runtime. If the match succeeds and the *simple_designation* of the *property_pattern* is a *single_variable_designation*, it defines a variable of type *T* that is assigned the matched value.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At runtime, the expression is tested against *T*. If this fails then the property pattern match fails, and the result is `false`. If it succeeds, then each *property_subpattern* field or property is read, and its value matched against its corresponding pattern. The result of the whole match is `false` only if the result of any of these is `false`. The order in which subpatterns are matched is not specified, and a failed match may not test all subpatterns at runtime. If the match succeeds and the *simple_designation* of the *property_pattern* is a *single_variable_designation*, the variable declared by its *identifier* is assigned the matched value.
```

Reviewer: I don’t think identifiers themselves declare things, declarations do, so following @gafter maybe:

```suggestion
At runtime, the expression is tested against *T*. If this fails then the property pattern match fails, and the result is `false`. If it succeeds, then each *property_subpattern* field or property is read, and its value matched against its corresponding pattern. The result of the whole match is `false` only if the result of any of these is `false`. The order in which subpatterns are matched is not specified, and a failed match may not test all subpatterns at runtime. If the match succeeds and the *simple_designation* of the *property_pattern* is a *single_variable_designation*, the declared variable is assigned the matched value.
```

Reviewer 4: A simple_designation does indeed define a variable. I reject your suggested change because the variable is defined whether or not it succeeds.

Reviewer: @gafter – I’m confused, I didn’t change what variable is defined/declared just the wording of your change suggestion above to (attempt to) make the *single_variable_designation* the actor rather than the *identifier*. That said its just a language change over your own suggestion and you should take your own if mine makes no sense to you!

> var o = ...;
> if (o is string { Length: 5 } s) ...
> ```
>
> *end example*
> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->
>
> <!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Example*: A run-time type check and a variable declaration can be added to a property pattern, as follow:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"PropertyPattern3", inferOutput:true} -->
> ```csharp
> Console.WriteLine(TakeFive("Hello, world!"));  // output: Hello
> Console.WriteLine(TakeFive("Hi!"));            // output: Hi!
> Console.WriteLine(TakeFive(new[] { '1', '2', '3', '4', '5', '6', '7' }));  // output: 12345
> Console.WriteLine(TakeFive(new[] { 'a', 'b', 'c' }));  // output: abc
> 
> static string TakeFive(object input) => input switch
> {
>     string { Length: >= 5 } s => s.Substring(0, 5),
>     string s => s,
>     ICollection<char> { Count: >= 5 } symbols => new string(symbols.Take(5).ToArray()),
>     ICollection<char> symbols => new string(symbols.ToArray()),
>     null => throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(input)),
>     _ => throw new ArgumentException("Not supported input type."),
> };
> ```
>
> The output produced is
>
> ```console
> Hello
> Hi!
> 12345
> abc
> ```
>
> *end example*

> ### §discard-pattern-new-clause Discard pattern

Reviewer 4: The subsumption and exhaustiveness subsections need to be revised to account for these new pattern forms.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> Every expression matches the discard pattern, which results in the value of the expression being discarded.

Reviewer 2: Should we have this in italics or bold? We're defining a term, right?

Reviewer 4: If we intend it to be a definition, we should reword it, perhaps something like

> The **_discard pattern_** matches every expression.

```ANTLR
discard_pattern
    : '_'
    ;
```

It is a compile-time error to use a discard pattern in a *relational_expression* of the form *relational_expression* `is` *pattern* or a *switch_statement*.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is a compile-time error to use a discard pattern in a *relational_expression* of the form *relational_expression* `is` *pattern* or as the pattern of a *switch_label*.

```

Reviewer: At least one compiler disagrees:

```
class _ { ... }
...
_ p = new _();
if (p is _)
```

Produces a warning that `_` refers to the type and not the discard pattern.

This is (unfortunately, blame history) probably the required semantics.

Reviewer 4: In this case, for compatibility it isn't a discard pattern. I will work on specifying that or add an issue for it.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

    ;
designation
    : simple_designation
    | tuple_designation
    ;
tuple_designation
    : '(' designations? ')'
    ;
designations
    : designation

>     | designations ',' designation

Reviewer: Grammar tidy up:

```suggestion
tuple_designation
    : '(' designations? ')'
    ;
designations
    : designation (',' designation)*
```

A tuple in C# has ≥2 members, however a *tuple_designation* as ≥0 members due to *positional_pattern* (for which this is a shorthand) supporting `ITuple` (≥0 elements, despite its name) and `Deconstruct` (probably ≥0 as well?) as well as tuples. This suggests a different name to *tuple_designation* might be better.

Reviewer 2: `if (x is var ())` compiles, somewhat shockingly... so the original grammar in the PR is probably right.

Reviewer 2: (Nigel will still suggest an edited change, but it'll be stylistic rather than semantic.)

    ;
```

Given a pattern input value ([§11.1](patterns.md#111-general)) *e*, if *designation* is *discard_designation*, it denotes a discard ([§9.2.9.2](variables.md#9292-discards)), and the value of *e* is not bound to anything. (Although a declared variable with that name may be in scope at that point, that named variable is not seen in this context.) Otherwise, if *designation* is *single_variable_designation*, at runtime the value of *e* is bound to a newly introduced local variable ([§9.2.9](variables.md#929-local-variables)) of that name whose type is the static type of *e*, and the pattern input value is assigned to that local variable.

> It is an error if the name `var` would bind to a type where a *var_pattern* is used.

Reviewer: ### Dealing with “var x” – Part 2

There is an ambiguity in patterns, the input “var x” could be recognised as a *declaration_pattern* or as a *var_pattern*. As is this PR only deals with the latter, on line 191 below, and says nothing about the former.

I think the intended semantics are:

- In *declaration_pattern* the *type* cannot be the *identifier* `var`; i.e. if it starts with `var` then *var_pattern* is considered.
- A *var_pattern* is invalid (not considered as a valid parse) if a type called `var` is in scope.

This is tackled with two suggestions:

1. One on line 83 covering *declaration_pattern* ([Part 1](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/pull/873/files#r2370218086))
2. Reword the original statement on line 191

```suggestion
A *var_pattern* cannot be used when a type named `var` is in scope.
```

> Note: I would have moved line 191 to the start of this clause but GitHub will not allow that, that would give:
>
> >### 11.2.4 Var pattern
> >A *var_pattern* *matches* every value. That is, a pattern-matching operation with a *var_pattern* always succeeds.
> >
> > A *var_pattern* is *applicable to* every type.
> >
> > A *var_pattern* cannot be used when a type named `var` is in scope.
>
> This seems to me to flow better, take your pick.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

If *designation* is a *tuple_designation*, the pattern is equivalent to a *positional_pattern* (§positional-pattern-new-clause) of the form `(var` *designation*, ... `)` where the *designation*s are those found within the *tuple_designation*.  For example, the pattern `var (x, (y, z))` is equivalent to `(var x, (var y, var z))`.

### §positional-pattern-new-clause Positional pattern

A *positional_pattern* checks that the input value is not `null`, invokes an appropriate `Deconstruct` method ([§12.7](expressions.md#127-deconstruction)), and performs further pattern matching on the resulting values.  It also supports a tuple-like pattern syntax (without the type being provided) when the type of the input value is the same as the type containing `Deconstruct`, or if the type of the input value is a tuple type, or if the type of the input value is `object` or `System.ITuple` and the runtime type of the expression implements `System.ITuple`.

```ANTLR
positional_pattern
    : type? '(' subpatterns? ')' property_subpattern? simple_designation?
    ;

> subpatterns
>     : subpattern (',' subpatterns)?
>     ;

Reviewer: Just a little grammar improvement:

```suggestion
subpatterns
    : subpattern (',' subpattern)*
    ;
```

subpattern
    : pattern
    | identifier ':' pattern
    ;
```

Given a match of an input value to the pattern *type* `(` *subpatterns* `)`, a method is selected by searching in *type* for accessible declarations of `Deconstruct` and selecting one among them using the same rules as for the deconstruction declaration.
It is an error if a *positional_pattern* omits the type, has a single *subpattern* without an *identifier*, has no *property_subpattern* and has no *simple_designation*. This disambiguates between a *constant_pattern* that is parenthesized and a *positional_pattern*.
In order to extract the values to match against the patterns in the list,

- If *type* is omitted and the input expression's type is a tuple type, then the number of subpatterns shall to be the same as the cardinality of the tuple. Each tuple element is matched against the corresponding *subpattern*, and the match succeeds if all of these succeed. If any *subpattern* has an *identifier*, then that shall name a tuple element at the corresponding position in the tuple type.

> - Otherwise, if a suitable `Deconstruct` exists as a member of *type*, it is a compile-time error if the type of the input value is not pattern-compatible with *type*. At runtime the input value is tested against *type*. If this fails, then the positional pattern match fails. If it succeeds, the input value is converted to this type and `Deconstruct` is invoked with fresh compiler-generated variables to receive the output parameters. Each value that was received is matched against the corresponding *subpattern*, and the match succeeds if all of these succeed. If any *subpattern* has an *identifier*, then that shall name a parameter at the corresponding position of `Deconstruct`.

Reviewer: This is a low-level implementation description, there should be no talk of “compiler-generated variables” – that is an *implementation* detail.

We need to re-think how `Deconstruct` is woven into the description of pattern matching – as an approximation pattern matching may be performed on single (simple or compound) values, tuples of values (or types which implement `ITuple`?), and on compound values that offer to present themselves as “tuple-like“ (pick a suitable term) by providing `Deconstruct`.

If we can get this covered upfront the descriptions of the different patterns forms should be a lot simpler/clearer.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console-without-using", name:"PositionalPattern1", ignoredWarnings:["CS8321"]} -->
> ```csharp
> static string Classify(Point point) => point switch
> {
>     (0, 0) => "Origin",
>     (1, 0) => "positive X basis end",
>     (0, 1) => "positive Y basis end",
>     _ => "Just a point",
> };
> 
> public readonly struct Point
> {
>     public int X { get; }
>     public int Y { get; }
>     public Point(int x, int y) => (X, Y) = (x, y);
>     public void Deconstruct(out int x, out int y) => (x, y) = (X, Y);
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->
> *Example*: The names of tuple elements and Deconstruct parameters can be used in a positional pattern, as follows:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"PositionalPattern2", ignoredWarnings:["CS8321"], inferOutput:true} -->
> ```csharp
> var numbers = new List<int> { 10, 20, 30 };
> if (SumAndCount(numbers) is (Sum: var sum, Count: var count))
> {
>     Console.WriteLine($"Sum of [{string.Join(" ", numbers)}] is {sum}");

> > }

Reviewer: This seems a poor example as it is longhand for:

```csharp
var (sum, count) = SumAndCount(numbers);
Console.WriteLine($"Sum of [{string.Join(" ", numbers)}] is {sum}");
```

and introduces an `if` suggesting that the match might fail.

Reviewer: Added to #1432
